Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Louis Bacho. He's a phd student at
the University of Kent and also the University of
Lille. His research investigates the History and Sociology of
Science and he's been particularly interested in contemporary misunderstandings
of evolutionary science. And there are appropriations in online
debates around sex and gender. And so today, we're
going to focus a lot on how people from
the Manos Manos Spe Muse research in the evolutionary
sciences, evolutionary psychology, particularly, but also other sciences like
that. So Louis, welcome to the show. It's a
big pleasure to everyone. Thanks for having me. So
before we get into some of the claims that
people from the men insphere make about women about
seduction about gender roles and all of that, could
you start by telling us what the Manos sphere
is? I mean, how would you define it?
Yeah. So fortunately, uh even though there are disagreements
about the different groups that go in there, um
there's quite a bit of consensus about what the
Manos sphere is. The harder thing is what you
put inside of it, but it's basically a loose
collection of men's groups on the internet. And they
tend to um try to cater to men from
a male perspective and to tell them about contemporary
issues in society, mostly Western society, once again, from
a masculine uh point of view. And so then
from then on, you have different subgroups that focus
on, on different themes and that have different agendas
and different goals and methods. But basically online men's
groups that try to talk as men to other
men about, you know, the lives of men in
current society.
Yeah. And so inside the menu sphere, you have
groups like for example, people related to uh um
Mras men's rights activists speak parts Mukta or men
going their own way, the Red Pill and Black
Pill communities and also some insults,
right? Yeah. So I use this typology with five
groups. You can find, you know, many different ones.
The internet goes very quickly movements um spawn new
hybrids of each other. They evolve all the time.
But basically big five, I would say you have
the men's rights activists. So they are the oldest
group in the Manos spe, they predate the internet.
So you can say they predate the Manoe too.
And they are kind of the opposites of feminism
for men in the sense that they want to
have reforms and cultural change on some issues that
are linked to men. So for example, a big
one is uh divorce laws or, you know, custody
battles in court after a divorce. Well, you are
going to find fathers rights groups who try to
the divorced fathers interests. Um And so they do
tend to be opposed to feminists around issues of,
you know, domestic violence divorce where, you know, both
sides basically take the sides of men or women.
Um, YOU then have pick up artists, they are
the other older ones. So they are your dating
seduction coaches. So maybe less ideological because more commercial
to try to sell you a service. But still
they've been there from the beginning and they've influenced
the language and the ideas of the manoe quite
a bit. And then in more recent years, you've
had um upsurge in new maybe more radical uh
communities, more misogynistic communities. So the three that are
specifically online because the first two I told you
about they existed before the internet. You had dating
coaches, you had men's rights activists. But the new
three from the two thousands, 2010 would be the
Rick Pill, which is kind of a combination of
the pickup artistry the game. So that's how they
call seduction techniques. And you have more, you know,
right wing politics in their anti PC culture, anti
progressivism and also just a whole life philosophy of
how to be a successful independent alpha male, et
cetera, et cetera. So that would be the red
pill. Mik Tao share a lot with the red
pill. So Mik Tao means men going their own
way, but they say society is too hostile to
men right now. So we should just live on
our own. So they are separatists and they advocate
primarily against any form of, you know, serious relationship
or commitment, uh romantic or sexual with a woman.
And the most infamous one these days, uh The
best known one are, I think undoubtedly Incels because
they have committed a few terror attacks in the
past decade. And these are um in young men,
mostly who are uh virgins and who are, who
have an entire identity based upon this sex lessness
and you know, this frustration of anger and bitterness
at not being able to find a, a relationship.
Mhm
And uh so you told us there about some
of the differences between these groups, but are there
general beliefs that you find across all these groups
or are they very different or diverse ideologically?
Yeah. So that was one of the, I think
challenges of trying to study the Manoe is trying
to find the, the common themes running through them,
trying to identify what makes them a Manoe because
otherwise, why would we be using this term if
they have nothing in common? And I think for
sure what you find is that there's the overall
discourse that there is some sort of male crisis
or malaise in Western society. So they will focus
on different goals, different aspects of it. So in
cells we talk about maybe uh all the males
except the best looking ones and they will focus
on relationships and sex. Men's rights activists will focus
on false rape allegations and, and reproductive rights for
men. So they have different focuses, but they kind
of all operate in this assumption that uh men
have a tough time in current society. Um There
might even be some sort of male crisis that
feminism hasn't been doing anything to try to combat
this or on the other hand, has been promoting
and furthering this by just either they will think
it has gone too far in defending women's rights
and interests or it was always some sort of
anti male political lobby or something like that. So
I think that's one of the trope that's uh
common to all these groups. And then they also
share a lot of jargon language, you know, terms
that are specific to the manoe that circulate between
those communities um and some sense of community as
well. Uh You know, people go there and they
share their experiences in, in the fraternal environment. So
you might think manos here and think about the
violence and the misogyny that's directed towards others, uh
which is definitely a feature. But now if you
go to those spaces, you will also see brotherhood
between guys, uh you know that open up and
talk about their relationships, their emotions, et cetera, et
cetera. So I would say that solidarity. Um The
anti feminism and the idea of a male crisis,
male molest would be the, the big three of
things that run through all the groups. Mhm
So I wanted to focus now a bit on
female sexuality and claims that these different groups make
about this topic. But before we get into the
claims specifically, let me just ask you when it
comes to female sexuality, what would you think are
the most important things for people to know about
it when they get across this kind of information
on the internet from the mens here?
So I would think that what you find on
the internet on the manos spe can be quite
remote from what, what you will find in actual
scientific papers. So sometimes it's explicitly drawn from a
paper, but you have the, the memes, you have
the tropes, you have the exaggerations, all these layers
uh in the politics, frankly, the fact that, you
know, if someone fits your preconceived idea, it will
be exaggerated. So my main advice for someone would
just be to and that's an advice in general,
of course, go to the original source. Um There
are some sources like science media or podcasts like
yours that I'm sure are um or textbooks that
are good sources, secondary sources that you can trust
and believe that they made a good job in
trying to honestly transcribe what was in the original
research as comes to the Manos spe this can
be the case. If you look, if you go
to the Incel Wikipedia, they have a big wiki
page on Testosterone, which is very well documented and
lots of footnotes and they love science. Uh That's
been one of the findings of my research. But
sometimes it's a commercially incentivized type of platform that
tries to sell, you know, horses and seminars to
men. Sometimes it's just a guy who doesn't seem
to understand the basic principles very well. So I
would say as a rule, if you know that
the source comes from the atmosphere, you just better
go check the research itself and look for yourself
is the sex difference that big uh what did
the researchers find? Does it allow to make this
very broad generalization about the sexes and things like
that? You know.
Yeah, but this is very interesting because even looking
at it from a, from a historical perspective, I
guess that we could say, and you will tell
me more about that. Uh We could say that
some early evolutionary accounts of female sexuality insisted on
some of the points that uh people from the
Manoe also bring to the table like women being
coy and uh having monogamous tendencies and stuff like
that,
right? So, since Darwin's time in evolutionary biology and
the idea of sexual selection, um Darwin had this
big thought that it's mostly the males who kind
of parades and fights and they try to catch
the female's attention and then the females choose. So
it was called female choice. And it's still thought
to be a huge, you know, driving factor in
evolution, uh, explaining the antlers of D A or
the, the plumage of the birds of paradise, et
cetera, et cetera. But interestingly, Darwin was so steeped
in the, in the cultural mindset of his time
that he thought that seems to be true in
all the animals except for humans. So he said
in humans, it seems to be the women who
dress up, who dress up with these frills and
laces and who parade in front of the men.
And it's actually the men who select. Um So
even then you can see that there was politics
that he didn't really maybe apply what he was
seeing uh to his own species on this little
area. So that was your traditional model and that
worked quite well, right? We know that males have
more reproductive variants in mammals because, you know, insemination
cost them, you know, from five seconds to 2030
minutes. I don't know, whereas uh females have to
go through the, the gestation process. And so it
did mean that there was selective pressure, increased, selective
pressure on young males to, you know, fight and
grow bigger and reproduce quick and early. So that's
how you explain sexual dimorphism. And that mostly stood
in evolutionary biology until the 19 seventies. And then,
you know, some primatologists in particular started noticing that
this just didn't fit what we were observing. You
know, females seem to be sometimes aggressive, manipulative, deceitful,
horny. And then what we just realized is that
they were, of course, also selected to selective pressures
and there were also players in the games of
sexual selection. Sure males might be fighting and there
tends to be this bias in biology where you
notice the males more because they're louder because they
are brighter because they fight more. They are more
rowdy. And so we kind of tended to overlook
all the ways in which females also competed for
reproduction. And even though there is less variants and
they have less to win quote unquote in terms
of fitness um in the Darwinian game than males
because, you know, a single man can sire 500
offspring. There's still huge variants. I mean, some females
do not reproduce and some have 356 kids. So
there was also a selective pressure there. And since
then, we have started investigated, uh you know, all
these aspects of female sexuality, all these potential fitness
benefits that they can derive. And um what's interesting
is that I would say the impetus behind this
was originally feminist. It was those female researchers saying
we have this male bias in our discipline, we
look at female behavior quite less. We don't see
females as competitive as potentially promiscuous. We just are
stuck in this Darwinian inherited framework where they are,
you know, coy and shy and choosy et cetera,
which can, which can hold for some species in
some context. But they were asking to complicate the
picture. And what's funny is that those, this line
of research on the female mating strategy has kind
of complex the picture of female nature. Right now,
you put competition, you put uh deceit manipulation, gossip,
aggression, coalitions. They are just, you know, organisms like
others. There are no, you know, perfect beings and,
but that was seen as feminist, you know, sex
is good. Um Females can be promiscuous as well.
There's nothing bad about it. And we have been
biased in our biology. What's interesting is that today
in the manoe, the people love these theories, they
love these hypotheses around female mating strategies. So I
wouldn't say they're really echoing the old school 19th
century Darwin style thing where they think that females
are coy and choosy. On the other hand, I
think they have an exacerbated view of how promiscuous
and unfaithful women are based on these accounts of
female sexuality that come from the evolutionary sciences and
they were originally kind of feminist inspired.
Ok. Now, that's very interesting. Yeah. And yeah, actually,
I should have said I should have rephrased my
question and said that these early evolutionary accounts are
the ones that uh people from the men insphere
would have liked to be true because you hear
many times from them that um women should, uh,
be monogamous, should stay faithful to their husbands or
their boyfriends. But, uh, but then when it comes
to men they can actually just, uh, screw around
with, uh, with how many women they can. It
doesn't matter if they are married or if they're
in a committed relationship, they can do that. Uh,
THEY are allowed to do that but the women,
no, not really.
Right. So, there is this insistence on what they
will call body count or trying to find a
sexual partner who has very little uh sexual experience
or relationship experience because they would think that it
makes for just a better and more committed partner.
And they will find some research in, for example,
sociology that show that the more partners you've had,
the less likely it is that your marriage is
gonna, is gonna end up well or that you're
the more likely it is that you're going to
divorce, et cetera. So they do have this age
old, sexual double standard for sure where uh you
have a lot of scrutiny on a woman's sexual
history and you don't care much about a man's
for sure.
Yeah. And by the way, since earlier, you were
talking a little bit about what could be some
of the benefits of short term and extra pair
mating for women. What are those benefits?
So I think it's first important to understand why
we asked the question. Um For males, there wasn't
really ever that question about what could be the
benefit for a male mammal of, you know, being
very horny all the time or trying to reproduce.
Because, you know, they can just, in most species,
I think 95% of mammal species, there are no
real fathers in the sense that fathers just reproduce
and then they leave. Uh, YOU, you, if you've
had cats and dogs, you know, that's how it
goes. So for most species, we really know what's
going on with males, probably over evolutionary history, any
time they could evolve in a way that's, you
know, made them likely to play this reproductive game
and not pay any of the costs and that
they could just uh inseminate a female and, and
then go away, that probably seems to have happened
in most species. However, for females, there was always
this idea that there was a huge limiting factor,
right? It's the number of eggs, but it's also
mainly the gestation, the lactation, you have to take
care of your offspring for maybe years before you
can get another one. So then this was the
puzzle. If that is the case, how come that
when we study other female uh mammals, especially primates,
they seem to solicitate and enjoy also population that
much. How come they were wired by evolution to
become so uh promiscuous as you will find that
term in the research literature, when the benefits are
unclear, you can mate with 12 males you're not
gonna have 12 times more offspring. So the researchers
start started to devise um hypothesis. One of them
that's been studied quite well in primates is paternity
confusion. So if you sleep around with uh several
males, none of them will be able to know
that they are the fathers of your offspring. And
so they will maybe all directly help raise them,
or at least they will refrain from killing them
because in a lot of crime and societies, if
a new male comes around and that he knows
that the, the kids are not his, he's just
gonna murder them to kind of, you know, replace
them with his own offspring. Or at least that's
the evolutionary selective pressure there. I'm not, I'm not
sure that's what he thinks about coming. I don't
know what's in Ali's head, but uh that's basically
how this could have evolved. So as a counter
strategy against the infanticides by males, maybe sleeping around
with several males could have allowed those, you know,
female primates uh to infuse the potential fathers. So
that's one of the potential benefits. So it's called
paternity confusion hypothesis. You have made switching hypothesis. So
you are going to kind of sample other partners,
other mates uh to kind of see if maybe
it's worth switching or having at least cultivating some
form of backup. You know, life is dangerous in
nature. Uh If you have kids to raise, it
can be nice to have backups. There's the resources,
the resource based hypothesis where, you know, you might
just be um having sex with several males because
you get several direct benefits from that be, you
know, food. I know shelter, protection, bodyguards, all types
of things. And um I don't think there's one
hypothesis that could stand for all the female mammals.
For example, the, the answer is probably that depending
on the ecological conditions and depending on the particular,
you know, social structure of a species, you probably
find uh infidelity quote unquote or a multiple mating,
extra pair mating. Uh THAT'S evolved in females in
through many evolutionary paths because there are many potential
benefits that were overlooked. We thought, oh yeah, a
female just needs one partner. She doesn't need to
enjoy sex and you know, she'll just select the
best father she can. And that's all she does.
One father, best seed, best genes, best parents. And
then that's perfect for, for her offspring. Now, that
model still holds in many species, but it's more
complicated. And I think we also found that through
bird studies. So birds are interesting to study these
dynamics because they kind of resemble us in the
sense that um they are relatively monogamous in a
lot of species. And you have the, the father
and the mother building a nest and raising the
the the young birds. So it kind of looks
like a human family. And uh that's also because
in birds, I think the males could not kind
of like the mammals evolved to just inseminate females
and leave because a bird just takes a lot
of feeding to do. Birds are very hungry for
food because they fly all the time. Their metabolism
is different. So birds just spend their days eating
and finding food. So they've evolved in that way.
That means that they are ideal candidates to study
monogamy. And then when we started doing DNA tracking,
we also thought that there was much more sleeping
around than we believed initially in birds. You know,
so they are, you know, like us partly monogamous.
But we also have rhythms of evidence that in
certain contexts, either the male or the female will
go to another nest and try to make with
other people. And we need to explain that because
our sexual selection models historically were quite monogamous. You
know, finding a good mate for the female. Here
are the challenges she faces and finding a good
mate for a male. Here is what he is
looking for, but it's actually much more complex and
there are many individuals to choose from. And yeah,
the so the picture has been complex for sure.
Yeah. And another kind of topic that is also
commonly brought up in man in the Manos Spe
Manoe podcasts and stuff like that has to do
with some research on the on the female ovulatory
cycle. So first of all, what does the research
action we say, and in what ways do people
from the manos tend to uh take from that
research or misuse it or twist it, twist it,
warp it. Uh uh I mean, what are the
kinds of claims that they make and shouldn't be
derived directly from the research?
Yes. So one class of hypothesis about the evolution
of female sexuality that I haven't mentioned is called
the dual mating strategy hypothesis. And so this means
that uh women, let's talk about humans. So I'm
gonna stop saying females. So uh women might have
evolved a drive for extra per mating over evolutionary
history. If uh for example, they could derive some
benefits from short term mating. So just having casual
sex can provide you sometimes maybe good genes in
terms of fitness, it can provide you all those
class of benefits and then you also have a
long term mate that you select for stability, providing
resources, being a father. And then maybe those two
things could have evolved concurrently so that women would
be, you know, kind of wired with uh drives
that both make them monogamous. But in certain circumstances,
they might have this interest for short term meeting.
And so one of the predictions of that hypothesis
was that around ovulation, when women are most fertile
in the fertile phase of the cycle, you would
have find maybe behavioral shifts. Because once again, over
history, if you are having casual sex on the
side, just at the moment when you're fertile, it
could mean that uh if you sleep with uh
partners where you can kind of, you can see
it's a complex type of hypothesis. It was kind
of far fetched, but some of it's interesting to
discuss. But if you sleep basically with a muscular,
tall, masculine uh man, someone who signals that he
has good genes around ovulation. And maybe you can,
you know, diversify the, the fathers of your offspring,
maybe you can have, you know, strong sons and
sexy sons, which was also part of this class
of hypothesis. And so one of the predictions for
that and we started testing, it is do women's
that women's sexual behavior actually change around ovulation. And
if it does and if the dual mating hypothesis
is true, it means that they should be looking
for a more masculine partner, they should be looking
for, you know, more casual sex just around ovulation.
They should maybe behave in a more, you know,
flirty, alluring manner. And uh some initial studies found
that so studies found that oh some strippers uh
receive more tips around ovulation. So maybe men can
unconsciously perceive when a woman ovulates and maybe women
can signal it differently. There were diary studies where
uh women were asked to say in their diary,
what day of the cycle they were in. And
also, you know, if they are having sexual fantasies
about someone else or their partner, et cetera and
there were studies about face preferences. Do women actually
want partners with more masculine faces and features around
ovulation and more or less, all of this has
failed to replicate or as foundered when the studies
are being conducted in more rigorous manners with bigger
samples and all the good controls and conditions that
you need to make good research. This research which
was mostly from the two thousands has not really
replicated well. So for example, there was a study
which found that women wore more revealing clothes when
they were around ovulation. But then you look at
the study, it was maybe 30 women. They excluded
all those who were, you know, not naturally cycling,
who are on the pill. They only took those
who were in relationships and they did not control
for the weather. So they, they, they had them
come at two points of the cycle, but maybe
they were just dressed, dressed more lightly and loosely
because the sun was shining better. And now in
the 2000 and twenties, you have some, you know,
good teams of researchers from Germany who try to
replicate the same effects, but they take hundreds of
respondents, they control for all the good parameters, the
preregistered hypotheses, and we mostly failed to replicate most
of the effects that were specifically linked to these
ovulatory shifts uh hypothesis. That was a corollary of
the dual mating strategy hypothesis, which meant that maybe
women had those two different uh types of reproductive
drives. And so, one of the only thing we
have that holds is that there is a general
increase in sex drive around ovulation in women that
seems to be certain. However, we are not sure
at all that it's directed towards some extra pair
partners doesn't seem to necessarily imply they want to
have more sex like on the side or with
someone else when they're in a committed relationship. This
means that whatever is happening with the hormones is
just making them hornier on ovulation, which from an
evolutionary perspective, uh is not that hard to explain.
But um so that's the entire brand line of
research that you were mentioning. And why does it
pleases people in the manoe? Well, though there's, you
know, this idea that they will take any research
about female promiscuity, they will take any research about
female infidelity. And since they have those negative opinions
about it, since they're quite maybe conservative implicitly about,
you know, females sexuality, they have those double standards
that we mentioned, they are angry, those this research
is perfect for them. You know, it can anger
them, it can kind of convert some of their
tropes that they have. So some tropes that you
find are even if you're in a relationship, she's
always looking for something else. You know, she's unfaithful,
she wants more masculine alpha or chad type males.
Well, if you have studies that show that she
is having more fantasies, sexual fantasies or wants more
masculine faces around ovulation that just fodder for your
uh anger if you will or if you thing
that, you know, women are not to be trusted
with and when they go to the club that
with their, you know, girlfriends, they are going to
be unfaithful and try to seduce other men. And
then you find a study that shows that, oh,
strippers get more tips around ovulation or women dress
more loosely around ovulation. It just kind of feels
uh fuels your entire narrative. But more than this
in the Red Pill, they have a saying which
is exactly the mirror of this dual mating strategy
hypothesis. And they know it. So that's quite interesting
to show that they are aware of those kind
of intricate debates, debates in evolutionary psychology that seems
to be kind of abstract and really specialized. But
you actually have communities of lay people on the
internet that are aware of this and that say,
oh, this is mate switching. No, this is dual
meaning they are aware about these things. They just
forget that these are hypotheses and that's several of
them can work together and all be true and
that this is all highly speculative at the moment,
you know, and so they have this saying in
the red tail community, that's alpha fox beta bucks.
So which means that the alpha man gets to
have sex, alpha thugs. And the beta man is
the man who's just providing the resources. He's just
the poor guy who's being, you know, exploited for
his resources by an Anthropoid strategy that basically says
if women maybe have a drive of pretension today
for infidelity, it comes because of a legacy of
this alpha beta bugs dynamic where they would have
one stable partner that they selected with one set
of preferences and then some casual sex partners that
she could have selected through other preferences. And that
obviously, you know, is perfect confirmation for them. But
it's also, you know, perfect rage fuel as the
Incel say that is something that just makes you
really angry.
Mhm uh And so another thing that people from
the mens sphere do if I understand it correctly
is that they also it's cherry peak uh scientific
information or cherry peak studies, right? Because for example,
just earlier, you were mentioning how most studies that
made those claims regarding the dual mating strategy, sexism
and hypothesis and so on were from the early
two thousands. And then since then, people have tried
to replicate them with better study designs, bigger samples
and stuff like that. And uh some of at
least some of those claims do not hold much
water, at least as far as we know now,
but they are in the manoe, they are still
going back to those studies and uh claiming that
that is all true right?
To be fair. I would say that that's also
something you can find in science, I mean, when
someone is committed to some hypothesis, they will kind
of always pick up the same study, try to
confirm their referred hypothesis. And I would say to
some degree that's even part of the healthy game
of science. You know, some people believe in a
hypothesis to try to investigate it. Now, they should
not hold on to it too long if the
evidence of course fails to confirm their hypothesis. But
I think part of what happens in the manners
sphere is that um the cherry picking, I'm gonna
describe it and answer you on this point. And
then afterwards, we can come back to the implicit,
I think part of your question, which is what's
their motives? What's their intent? Is it? Yeah,
that was another thing that I was going to
ask you. So
cherry picking, we can find evidence for sure. But
as I said, in any literature review by a
scholar, you're likely to find some things that they
like a little more, some that they like it
less. But this is of course exacerbated when there
are politics and those groups don't necessarily, their goal
is not to accurately depict the world. You know,
that's the goal of scientists, more or less all
of them. Uh But, you know, manager groups all
have a different goal, you know, recruit men. Um
Have you seduced women or on the other hand,
trying to convince you to never have sex with
women again. So of course, what I would call
the cherry picking is that depending on their agenda,
you will see that they focus on different areas
of the evolutionary scientific literature. So the most obvious
case is picnic artists and incels, they hate each
other. They kind of try to attract the same
demographic, you know, young sexless men who kind of
roam the internet. And in the two thousands, those
guys would have found pick up artist sites that
would have told them. Listen, here are my 10
tips to be successful with women. I'm gonna explain
to you female psychology with evolution. And now in
the 2000 and twenties, those same young guys, there
is competition with the intel community that are going
to tell them. Listen, you are doomed, you were
doomed from the start because of your genetics. She
will only be interested in uh having sex with
chads and here's the science to back it up.
So if you look at those two communities, they
will all cite some sections, some parts of the
literature, but it's obviously with very different focus because
of their agenda. So you could call that cherry
picking. For example, pickup artists are gonna insist on
female mating preferences for things that you can change
or engineer. So they will say uh confidence is
sexy. You know, studies have shown that women want
confident men or uh hu humor is very attractive.
So you should be funny. You should be confident.
So they will zoom in on the things that
you can change. Whereas Incels, they will take other
equally valid and they can interpret them correctly. There's
not necessarily a conscious twisting of the results, but
they will say here is the results about the
negative effects of uh being artistic in sex and
dating, being short, having a small penis, being bald,
being this that so all things that you can
and very hardly or if not at all change.
So once again, some of them are commercial, they
are trying to sell you hope. And so they
say here's this research, there's hope for you. And
then this little group is trying to peddle hopelessness.
And it says, look at this research, it's doomed.
You know, what they all forget to do is
of course, give you free precisely the statistics, the
effect sizes in those studies. You know, it can
both be true that humor is very important to
get a sexual partner. Maybe it can have a
correlation of, I don't know, 0.3 or four in
a given, you know, dates with uh in terms
of, you know, trying to attract someone else that
you're sitting across from and then maybe your height
if you're short will also have another very negative
effect on potentially on average the attraction that this
woman might feel for you. But there's no reason
to kind of focus on only one or the
other you know, the goal of a good scientific
model would be trying to know all these variables,
all these predictors, their respective, you know, strengths and
then the context in which some of them are
activated and some of some of which are not.
And in the manos spe so first off, scientists
are very far from being this there, you know,
uh we are very far from having that level
of predictive power in terms of something as social
and complex as you know, mate selection and sex
and dating. And in the mane, they kind of
focusing on one aspect or two and they just
become firebrands advocates for that, you know, everything that
matters is face, everything that matters is height, everything
that matters is looks and you see that in
Incel communities quite a bit, they are always fighting
trying to hierarchy, what traits is the worst, what
traits gives you the less chances of succeeding at
sex and relationship. And so they will kind of
dig up those studies that are not mutually incompatible,
but they by trying to hierarchy them to have
a very simplistic vision of what's going on. They
are going to unnecessarily kind of cherry pick basically.
But it's not, you know, cherry picking so much
as extreme exaggeration and simplification that has its roots
in individuals and groups, trajectories, values biases, agendas, et
cetera, et cetera. So that's what I'm trying to
unpick with my research basically.
Great. But when it comes to their motivations. I
mean, this is probably a two part question but
IW I was interested in, in knowing if you
have any ideas about what the motivations from both
the, the people who produce this kind of content
for the manos fore and then the ones who
consume it, what the motivations there would be. Um,
BECAUSE for example, when it comes to the ones
that produce it, it could be, I guess that
in certain cases, they have gone through some bad
experiences in their relationships and then that's why they
start talking about that on the internet or perhaps
sometimes they are just grifters. They know what they're
saying is mostly BS, but they still say it
because they know it sells and they know they
can attract, uh I don't know v vulnerable single,
sexless men uh to, to their cause let's say,
or at least make them spend money on their
products. And, and then, but when it comes to
the ones who consume it, I would imagine that
the vast majority of them would be, uh, you
mentioned at the beginning virgins. Uh And they would
be also sexless men and they would be also
men who had bad relationships or just ended a
relationship recently. So bad experiences. Uh Do, do you
have any idea about what the motivations behind those
kinds
of
people are? There are three things I want to
say in order first, you said maybe a majority
are virgins. So that's just Incels are just one
subset of the marriage. But most groups will mostly
be composed. Some of them of middle aged, you
know, college educated white men, the forties or fifties
who were married have had divorces, things like that,
that type of profile. So these people have had
plenty of relationships in their lives and you also
have the pick up artists who have, you know,
presence if not hundreds of partners because of what
they do, you know, they spend their entire life
trying to chase after women. So I don't even
think your average maner, you know, number of sex
partner, I would have a hard time predicting if
it's below or over average. Um So that's just
one caveat. The second one is that uh those
people are quite hard to reach. So I've interviewed,
for example, one of the main men's rights activist
leader is called Warren Farrell. He is a very
well known activist. He's a public figure. But for
those new, more obscure, more radical online only communities
like Incels and men going their own way. It's
much harder to reach them out for interviews. They
don't show their faces, they use pseudonyms. So if
you can't ask someone about what drives them to
do something, it becomes really, you know, unsteady ground
to actually try to speculate on people's motives. And
the data I'm mostly working with is discourse, what
they produce. So forums, social media videos, their ebooks,
uh, Discord, you name it. I've like scraped and
studied a huge collection of materials that was generated
spontaneously by those people. So, one of the advantages
is that they didn't ask one of my questions.
I didn't get to orient the research process. I'm
kind of seeing what they naturally did as a
researcher. But of course, the flip side is that
I can't ask them questions. So it's always hard
to know about motives. I've also run a survey,
I will be more than happy to tell you
more about it about their level of scientific education,
how well they know evolutionary science, trying to measure
certain biases and all that and where they get
their scientific content from. So I can also talk
about this as regards the motives. There are hundreds
of thousands of people in the manoe. It would
be very hard to generalize on one type of
motive I think for the influencers and those people
who produce the content. I'm sure you find drifters
uh in especially dating seduction type areas like coaches
who know that basically their um students don't really
stand a chance or that they're not gonna change
their lives or that maybe this is a little
bit overpriced for, for what they're selling. Uh I'm
sure you have people who are convinced you are
doing good. Um You have a lot of men
who are from there because of, you know, outrage
at some inequalities in society, some things that they
think that shouldn't be this way. You know, feminists
should be talking about this. Why do men get
drafted for military service in the United States in
2024 when the army is now, you know, gender
neutral, you have men and women serving in the
army. Why would it only be men that get
sent in the next, you know, Korean War? So
sometimes you have just men that go to these
movements because of some initial outrage. That's more political.
But a lot of the time what you see
with the research is that it's kind of emotional
but it's hard to separate, of course from the
political, but it has to come from negative experiences
in relationships. You know, if you were cheated on,
uh you're of course, gonna lend an ear to
those groups that tell you about why women are
naturally, you know, have evolved to always look for
a better partner to switch mates. As we said,
et cetera. If you have had a bad divorce
and you lost the custody of your kids because
this was contested in court. Of course, you're going
to land near to, you know, those activists that
tell you that current society is completely uh you
know Gyno Center, they call it so that it
is favorable to women and they might even have
an evolutionary story to put on top of that.
Um So yeah, variety of motives, I would think
a big one that we should not overlook is
to look for community longing for community, especially with
Incels. Um If you've been bullied your entire life,
there are, you know, studies that show high prevalence
of bullying with them. Um You're a virgin. So
that's frustrating when everyone, you know, starting to discover
sex and relationships. You've never been treated, you know,
decently by people. You know, middle school and high
school can be very tough, et cetera. And then
you find this community of like minded people, you
know. Um So that's for sure. One of the
big factors there as well, that uh that sense
of community I would say. And as for the
content producers, I, I'm trying to refrain from making
judgments about, you know, he's stupid. He's, he a
grifter. Does he just not understand the research? Does
he consciously try to twist it? It's really hard
to know.
Mhm. But about that survey that you referred to
there briefly, do, could you tell us more about
it? What kind of survey was it? And what
were the results you got there?
So, as I said, those people are quite suspicious.
So if you come there and tell them, hey,
I'm a researcher. I want to know about your
politics, your life, trajectory, your life events, um They
might, well, first they might fear you're the FBI
or you're just a woke uh academic that wants
to smear them. Um So I'm not asking a
lot of very personal questions. But what I thought
was I need a science quiz. You know, I
keep studying how those people use and understand science.
And sure it's very easy to reveal the flaws
and the biases and to say, oh, look here
they've misinterpreted that study, everyone can do that. But
what do we know about their baseline level of
understanding? You know, how well did they know natural
selection, the basic concepts in the life sciences? And
so what I did is I designed a 20
item quiz, science quiz. So a little bit of
stats, a little bit of hormones, genes and then
mostly evolutionary biology and evolutionary psychology. I took most
of my questions from pre-existing questionnaires that had been
validated undergraduate level. And then for comparison, I ran
the same survey with a group of random us
respondents who have a baseline. And so I managed
to recruit 100 and 50 people from the manos
sphere from various subgroups. Um Those are very hard
to reach. I would have hoped to have more
and I have my 150 people, my US respondents,
they took the exact same science quiz and the
results couldn't be clearer, you know, the Manoe Ands,
they have 15 out of 20 in terms of
correct answers. And my average group has 10 out
of 20. So obviously, people from the Manos here,
one of my main findings, you can't ascribe all
of this to this misunderstanding the research, you know,
a lot of them, they understand evolution quite well.
There's almost zero creationism in the Manos sphere. They
are, you know, Darwinian enthusiasts. So this makes them
a very unique part of the American right wing
of the spectrum where, you know, protestant fundamentalism is
extremely strong politically in the Republican Party. And the
matters here has been verging to the right, but
still they believe in evolution, you have high levels
of college education in terms of science. So a
lot of them have had, you know, science courses
in college. And um then I'm trying to dig
things further by asking, asking them about the sources
of scientific content. You know, do you get your
science from the atmosphere or do you get it
from Wikipedia youtube? Do you get it from textbooks,
books? And the man here doesn't come in super
high in these lists. So those people they are
fond of, you know, Robert Sapolsky lectures Richard dawkins'
books. I'm sure lots of them watch our podcast
as well. Um There's a lot of content to
be found on the internet with good, you know,
scientific stuff. So once again, this complicates the picture
quite a bit because um they do understand the
evolutionary, you know, principles quite well. They do know
what evolutionary psychology is. And then my job is
just trying to go in the details and see
what they get wrong, what they get, right? What
they exaggerate. But what they also invent because one
of the things that I found is that um
it's a unique phenomenon in which people in a
manos sphere actually devise their own hypothesis, their own
evolutionary stories. And that's, I don't think something that
we had seen before a community of lay people
who appropriate a scientific discipline, they understand the way
that you reason because evolutionary psychology is a lot
about this, you know, adaptation is type of explanation,
explanatory mindset and they apply it the world around
them. And that's fascinating. So I'm also studying those
uh those homemade or manos sphere made hypothesis
great. Uh And by the way, since you mentioned
there, the fields that they draw from, they draw
their information from and misuse uh and misuse it.
Uh Why do you think that evolutionary psychology specifically
is so popular in the menu?
Ok. I think I have three answers to that.
Ok, because I've been thinking about this quite a
lot, you know, why don't they appropriate sociology or
psychology, mainstream psychology or anthropology, what's going on with
it? I think firstly, they do come from a
perspective where the sexes are quite different. Um They
tend to view men and women are really different.
Uh And it gets reinforced by their ideology that
makes them act in more, you know, maybe masculine
ways and expect women to behave in more feminine
ways. And so they kind of see the world
around them like this. And that's one of the
hallmarks of evolutionary psychology, right? It's one of the
few scientific fields that really looks at the behavioral
and psychological difference between men and women, but has
a model to predict where those differences happen and
where they don't happen. And so I think the
sex different stuff that you find in evolutionary psychology
is inherently just much more aligned with their pre
established kind of folk wisdom or ideas or just
the way that they lived in society. I think
um the people who you, whom you end up
finding in the manos spe there's lower chance that
those are people who've always found men and women
to be quite similar, who's always, who have always
hung around with, you know, female friends and sisters
and, and guys and they kind of seek humanity
as a whole. Whereas, you know, if you have
this kind of sex differentiated uh perception of life
plus ideology on top, then evolutionary psychology can give
you perfect explanation for these issues. I think the
second uh reason why EP is so popular is
the fact that those communities do tend to focus
a lot on sex and relationships. And so, you
know, pick up artists, they are seduction coaches, they
try to get you a girlfriend in cells, say
we don't have a girlfriend, mita tell you you
should not have a girlfriend. So you see that
they are almost all around this nexus of, you
know, sex and gender and relationships and dating and
seduction and all that. And once again, evolutionary psychology
is a discipline of choice for that. You know,
evolutionary psychologists do study a lot of uh sex
and mating. And I think the third reason is
more political. Evolutionary psychology itself is very controversial and
it's been um received very critically by feminists for,
you know, the past 30 or 40 years because
it insisted so much on the sex differences. And
the feminists had always been suspicious of these uh
biological models of, you know, why men and women
behave differently. And so, since evolutionary psychology itself is
kind of targeted by, you know, left wing progressive
movements or at least feminists in academia as some
sort of potentially hidden veiled male supremacist agenda type
of discipline. Well, that's perfect if you are yourself
an anti feminist, you know, there's kind of this,
oh, if the feminist hates that and it must
be something good, there must be something good about
it. And I've seen that actually written in many,
you know, Manoe weeks and pages like, oh, feminists
hate evolutionary psychology. They love the idea that they
love something that feminists hate. Even though if you
actually look at the field of ep itself, those
tend to be either, you know, psychologists or anthropologists
heavily feminized, you know, maybe more than 50% women
at least today get, you know, graduate degrees in
psych and end. Um So lots of feminists in
those fields as well. They tend to be more
or less, you know, liberal researchers uh living in
urban cities. So they are not your male supremacists
as you would imagine in them. You know, evolutionary
psychologists do not really fit this bill for the
most part. But the fact that their discipline is
controversial and hated by feminists, I think is one
of the biggest draws for the Manoe. And maybe
if I had to have one last one, they
are just very gifted writers and popular writers for
evolutionary science. I mean, Steven Pinker Richard Dawkins, those
are just top notch science writers. They have reached
wide broad audiences. Uh I don't know about your
personal trajectory, but you know, that's how I got
into those disciplines in the first place. You know,
some of those fantastic books by Pinker or Dawkins,
you find great lectures on youtube by Robert Sapolsky,
who's a, you know, hormone guy at Harvard. And
so I think maybe another explanatory factor is that
those disciplines, those fields have been very good at
producing top notch and enthusing stimulating, you know, scientific
content as well.
Yeah, I, I mean, in my particular case, I
started with uh Sapolsky and Pinker and then went
on from that, I, I think that those are
probably the two most common people that, that people
mentioned when they're talking about how they got into
evolutionary psychology. But le let me ask you perhaps
about what could possibly be 1/4 hypothesis to explain
why evolutionary psychology is so popular among the Manoe.
Could it be that uh evolutionary psychologists the way
they present information leads or contributes to tho uh
those kinds of claims that we hear on the
manos sphere? Or, or there could, it could be
the case that there are just a few bad
apples in evolutionary psychology who promote those kinds of
views? I mean, do you have any thoughts on
that?
So once again, we go back to motives which
are really hard to ascertain. Um EVOLUTIONARY psychologists, the
big household names, they also tend to be writers.
So they sell books. You know, David Buss sells
hundreds of thousands of books, I'm sure. And so
they probably know that part of the market comes
from those Manoe Darwinian aficionados. Now, I don't know
what's the motive there? I don't even know what
you can do about it. They try to write
the best books they can, I'm sure. Uh BUT
you also find some instances where, you know, evolutionary
psychologists seem to have kind of tried to appeal
to the same demographics as the manos sphere. So
most famously David Buss opened a dating course, um
a few years ago, it was called First Date
Course. And he was saying, hey, I'm a scientist.
Uh I've worked at all these fancy places and
I'm the expert in the world in sex and
mating. And if you paid $1000 for my course,
I'm gonna teach you much better than all those
pickup artist guides. Jeffrey Miller in the two thousands.
He had written a book that was the same,
you know, so he's kind of criticizing pickup artists,
but he's not criticizing them because mostly because they
objectify women because they are obsessed with just casual
sex because they just don't give men any sense
of their own worth other than just, you know,
trying to find someone to sleep with. But he
was mostly saying their things don't really work. And
here is the good science. And so they are
evolutionary psychologists who use their expertise as sex dating
seduction experts to try to sell commercial products because
there are very strong incentives, there's a very big
market. So in a way, they share part of
this market with Manoe people, you know, they try
to distance themselves from it, but they also try
to appeal to the, you know, sexless young men,
nerdy sciency demographic. I think it would be much
better if they got their tips from, you know,
a scientist uh with actual research that's much more
nuanced than from the Manoe. But you could say
that maybe some of those researchers, it's really hard
to know if I can't interview them or uh
what their motives are, what their views are. So,
um yeah, I'm not, I'm not so sure that
that's obviously been one of the big questions. Uh
And I do think that evolutionary evolutionary psychologists have
stressed sex differences a lot. Um You know, David
buss run this very famous study on 37 cultures
where you have men and women rate their preferences.
And since he was trying at the time in
the late eighties and early nineties to promote ep
he really stressed on the finding that he found
some stable cross cultural sex differences about resources and
looks. If you look at the results, there's so
much similarity between men and women, you know, they
want kind, they want honest, they want intelligence. And
if you actually look at the, of the variant
that's explained by sex, it's just ridiculously low. I
think it's in the single digits compared to the
variants that can be explained by the different cultures
that were surveyed. So I think for sure, evolutionary
psychologists in their fight against, you know, blank slate
views. Um I've kind of stressed a lot on
heredity. They have stressed a lot on, you know,
genes do matter and, you know, there are different
genetic and behavioral differences between the sexes and the
in this ideological warfare. Maybe they've been far, maybe
they've also neglected to say, let's not be too
deterministic either. We can't explain much of these variants.
There's a lot of cultural variation, um There's lots
of different patterns in behavior. And so I think
one of the other reasons why EP gets appropriated
and not behavioral ecology, for example, I'm sure you've
had behavioral ecologists in your podcast. They use the
same Darwinian models. They mostly use the same methods
these days. Maybe they do more ethnography, but it's
very similar. But the behavioral Ecologist look at, looks
at the d like what resource or pathogens in
a given environment makes humans behave in animals in
a different way. Whereas the evolutionary psychologist historically is
trying to find the human universals, you know, the
deep structure of the mind, the things that we
all share in common human nature. And so I
think in that regard, also, we can say that
evolutionary psychology in its project and communication is more
liable to be appropriated by people who want to
do very gross um gross um simplifications or generalizations
about men, women, humans in general, you know, humans
are this way, you know, they are a species
with language. Uh THAT'S evolutionary psychology, you know, the
language instinct by Tinker. Now, uh behavioral ecologists look
more at the, you know, we had the variation,
the the differences between cultures. And so maybe that's
also why it has been less appropriated than evolutionary
psychology. And also it's less controversial. Uh So maybe
it's less alluring for those uh manoe people. Yeah.
And you were talking about uh revolutionary psychology many
times being focused on sex differences, differences between men
and women. But I think that possibly another issue
here when it comes to how evolutionary psychologists talk
about their own research is that they perhaps do
not put enough emphasis on the fact that even
among women and among men, there's variability. So uh
there are many times where they focus so much
on the differences between men and women that perhaps
they forget to say that uh among women, there's
lots of variation. And among men, there's also lots
of variation in terms of what they're interested in,
for example, a partner and stuff like that.
Yeah. So to be fair, I think variation is
one of the things that evolutionary psychologists investigate. So
for example, in personality research, you have lots of
evolutionary psychologists and in personality research, you have to
kind of try to explain why are some people
shy? Why are some people confident? Where does this
variability come from? And can it be explained with
Darwinian principles? You know, is it just all noise
or random things happening with alleles or are there
just evolutionary trajectories that explain these patterns? And I
think for mating, um there's also a recognition that
people are extremely different, you have different fetishes, kings
people look for more casual sex, some look for
uh more committed relationships. So they've been building scales,
you know, like uh socio sexual, so sexuality orientation,
things like that. So I don't want to say
that they, they kind of put this idea aside
like they know there are huge variability in the
data and they do try to explain it. It's
just incredibly hard and messy it's just really difficult
to explain, you know, why some people like licking
feet and why some people like cross dressing and
why some people just are not interested in sex
altogether. You know, this is just very difficult topic.
So they do tend to simplify and generalize and
talk about averages. I think in their popularization endeavors,
they do remind that I'm just talking about average
difference here. It means that there can be overlap.
I'm not saying all women are like this. All
men are like this. But I do think that
in the scientific literature itself, in the papers, all
those caveats, all those precautions, they're kind of thrown
away. So you find that you find them in
books, you find them in textbooks. But when you're
talking to other evolutionary psychologists, it's like we know
we are talking about averages. We know I'm not
saying all women are like this. We know what
an ethic size is, what the correlation is. But
what they don't really know is that people, you
know, manage your people can access these papers today.
You know, they know psy hub, they know Google
scholar. So it's not as if when you're writing
a science paper just as was the case 30
years ago, you're only writing to your colleagues in
your academic very niche branch. Now you're also kind
of writing to the whole world and you know,
those papers, they can end up on Twitter, they
can end up on Reddit and it's been seen
with alt rights uh movements, white supremacist movements that
have those journal clubs when they kind of scour
the new research in population genetics and everything that
they can find to support their race science, uh
pseudoscience they will find. So researchers now kind of
have this new responsibility that maybe even in their
papers, they need to be more careful about restating
those percussions, you know, about variability, ethic sizes, et
cetera, et cetera.
Yeah, I mean, many evolutionary psychologists probably are not
even aware that people from the Manoe are misusing
their research or presenting it or making specific limbs
about it that they do not agree with. Right?
I mean,
so I've also been running a survey on that,
you know, asking them if they were aware, it
was a small survey. I only, you know, there
are very few in the first place. So I
think there were around 50 respondents. Um A lot
of them had, I think maybe 20% of my
respondents, like 10 out of 50 had seen their
research personally appropriated, you know, for politics in some
sort of another on social media. So lots of
them are aware. Um They tell me anecdotally that
when they, their students tell them that when they
start watching Evolutionary Psychology on the internet, maybe you
can start with your podcast but it can end
with, you know, Manoe stuff, for example. Um So
there seems to be a pipeline there and there,
there, there have been articles and discussions among the
evolutionary psychology community more recently. Plus I've been sharing
my research for the past years in their journals
and their conferences. So I kind of come to
these conferences and tell to these people. Hey, uh
here is what lay people are doing on the
internet with your um research, you know, here's their
attitudes is how well they understand it. Here are
the biases. So I do think that nowadays it's
been, it's quite well known in the evolutionary psychology
community. And um they can't really say that they
are not aware of what's going on, you know.
Uh Yeah, I mentioned that there's a possibility just
because just recently Daniel Con Conroy Beam, uh an
evolutionary psychology researcher. Uh I mean that he wrote
an article, I, I'm not sure where it is
published but he wrote an article but basically, yeah,
e exactly uh where he basically talks about how
he wasn't aware of all that. Some people in
the manoe was, were misappropriating his own research and
making claims that are completely different from what he
was studying there. Uh I mean, I'm going to
interview, actually, I'm going to interview him actually early
next year and we can get a little bit
more into that, but there are at least a
few people that are probably not aware of it.
Yeah. But see now he is aware and he's
writing articles about it. And III, I think I
contributed to that. He, he because I know I
know him and he said, he credited me for
kind of opening his eyes to the, to the
entire thing. But to be fair, the first time
I reached out to him to tell him about
my research, he said, oh, I've been waiting for
this for years. So like they know that there
are some, you know, men's rights, uh anti people
who do use their research. They also know that
some academics are probably sympathetic to those ideas as
well in the field. And so that's kind of
a political, ideological warfare that's also going on inside
this branch of academia if you will. But I
don't think anyone is unaware these days, mostly because
also the anthropologists, the geneticists, they've had this reckoning
already 56 years ago, there was the Buffalo shootings
in New York where the killer actually posted graphs
from their journals, their science. And so they've been
reflecting a lot on how come our discipline is
so loved by Racists and white supremacists. And that's
kind of the same reckoning that's going on with.
Ep you know, how come anti feminists, how come,
you know, misogynists, uh like our discipline so much,
isn't there something wrong there? And I think my
goal here is just to document this, contribute to
the debate. I'm not saying I have easy solutions.
The research is fascinating. I'm sure we'll talk about
that afterwards. You know, it do. I don't even
want people not to look at evolutionary psychology. I
love evolutionary psychology. So what's my recommendation here? It's
very difficult. But uh I do think the reckoning
has been starting to come for um evolutionary psychologists
and another driving factor. There is two other guys.
Uh Mike Murphy has a evolutionary science podcast if
I can name the your competitors. And so he
has been kind of engaging and debunking with Manos
fore people online because he's on social media a
lot. So he would find those people plumbing over
and over again. And there's date, psychology date, like
he has a Twitter where he shares, you know,
kind of evolutionary inspired sex and dating research and
he has been engaging with the Manoe quite a
lot on social media. So I think these guys
are doing tremendous work and they are also trying
to kind of sensitize all the research community about
these issues,
right? So I, I mean, just before we get
into the last part of our conversation, which in
which I would like to ask you about probably
some of the ways we could deal with the
misuse of evolutionary psychology and other evolutionary sciences in
the Manos sphere. Let me just ask you about
some other aspects of society, gender and stuff like
that, that we haven't touched on earlier, that we
also see a lot in the Manos sphere. So
when it comes to gender roles specifically and what
they understand as being feminine or masculine or masculinity
and femininity. What are perhaps some of the most
common claims that you see in the menu?
So once again, there's a lot of variability because
I would say there are two strands that are
completely opposed. But you also find them cohabits quite
easily in the manos sphere. Some of the earlier
men's rights people in the 19 seventies, they came
from a movement which was called men's liberation. And
this was a ally of feminism. And these guys
were saying, hey, the women are really finding a
general role. They are want to enter the workforce
politics, business. That's great. Why don't we do the
same? Why don't we take more time to spend
with our kids? Why don't we stop working 50
hours a week? Why do we don't we talk
more about our emotions? Be less homophobic? So this
was a very woke moment, a movement for the
time and they were basically trying to deconstruct masculinity
and some of these people have remained, some of
these ideas have. So inside the men's rights movement,
they are also very suspicious of what they call
trad cons traditional conservatives because they think this is
also oppressive to men. They think having you wake
up every day to put bread on the table,
to be the provider of your family, having to
be, you know, kind of shut down your emotions,
not being able to open your frailness, vulnerabilities. They
all think these are the negative aspects of masculinity.
So you find those people in the memos, but
in the Red Pill community, you also find those
who say you need to be independent, self sufficient,
you need to be lean, you need to be
muscular, just be an alpha man and everything will
go your way. So it's hard to generalize about
what you find in terms of ideology in general.
But if I had to take one example, that's
gonna interest us because of the evolutionary science that
they put behind it. They are very fond about
this idea of male disposability. So they do think
that because as I explained, wombs and eggs are
a limiting factor in mammal reproduction and you find
plenty of sperm and plenty of males to provide
it. Nature has evolved like species of have evolved
at least humans in such a way that males
are seen as disposable. Males are not really biologically
valuable. So that's the argument and then they will
write entire books. Well, they find examples from our
society to say that this is such a broad
term. What is disposable? You can explain many things
with it. So men are sent off to die
in war. Men are more victims of suicide. Men
tend to suffer more homelessness, they tend to die
younger, they die from drugs more, these are all
very interesting social issues and I'm not saying we
shouldn't look at why men do these things more.
It's very important to address them, of course. But
this is all to feed their idea of male
disposability. You know, males, we are kind of nature's
experiments. We are just there to provide our sperm,
but the female dominates. So, very interestingly, they have
a vision of biology. It's not the male supremacist,
18th, 19th century vision that you would think about.
It's kind of a reverse of that because remember,
they think they are oppressed, they think that male
contemporary society is hostile to men. So they find
in the biology, a model that uh can completely
explain that by saying, yeah, we've always been this
way, you know, we have been the Canon fathers.
We are the disposable men. Now, the problem with
that is that the evolutionary reasoning is completely spurious.
You know, um Darwin himself wondered why are there
so many males? We don't need 50% of males.
We could just have one lucky ma male for
10 females and there would be more peace, less
competition and he could inseminate all of them and
the species would perpetuate. However, we know that natural
selection does not operate at the level of what
is good for the entire species. You know, organisms
just kind of fight in this struggle of natural
selection to maximize their own fitness. And so males
over history, even though there could be less males
for the good of the species, they've remained, they've
remained, they fought, they've had their competition, their natural
selection, their dimorphism and testosterone, et cetera. And so,
um, the, the problem with the theory of male
disposability that's very popular in the manoe and they
use it a lot to talk about general roles,
you know, you know, as a man you're expected
anyways, you're disposable, you know, you're nothing to your
wife or to your kids, you're just cog in
the machine. Um The problem is that uh the
evolutionary model is not the best to justify this.
You know, and since the 19 thirties, there was
a geneticist named Ronald Fisher and he kind of
explained why we have more or less 50 50%
of males and females, you know, this stable sex
ratio in most species. And his arguments was a
thought experiment, you know, imagine you have a species
with 90% females, 10% males. This would mean that
the expected reproductive success of a son is nine
times higher than that of a daughter, which means
that alleles that would kind of with your sex
ratio of the parents towards having more male kids
would be selected because of some is a huge
boon in terms of offspring and fitness, which means
that we would kind of naturally have a rebalancing
of the sex ratio. It's kind of what we
observe in most species. I mean, we know sex
ratios are variable in humans. We know there are
slightly more male babies born and female babies. But
let's say it's more or less a across, you
know, mammals rather a stable. And we have good
explanations for that. And so it shows that the
male disposability argument does not really hold water. Uh
BUT it's very, very popular to discuss society. And
that's one of the main justifications for their feeling
of, you know, oppression and being like, yeah, basically
useless and not looked after by society, which is
a thing that I think should be addressed because,
you know, it's, it's a valid concern and it's
also potentially dangerous for the entire society. So,
and what about claims about supposed alpha males? What
do they tend to say about that in the
manoe?
So I think in the atmosphere um being alpha,
being an alpha man has um two or three
implications or there are three elements of the definition.
There's a physical one, you know, you have to
be muscular, lean fit. Uh There's also the idea
that uh you're independent, you're self sufficient, you're driven
by, you know, projects, you do your own thing,
you don't owe anything to anyone else. And the
third one, which is kind of linked would be,
you don't get in committed relationships. You kind of
are too um we've drawn distant cocky. Um You
pretend that women don't have an influence or power
on you. So you are this, you know, I
don't know, John Wayne Harrison Ford type figure the
issue with that is manifolds. Firstly, you don't find
the alpha male uh term in human research literature
a lot. Even for other animals, it's not very
popular. It was called for wolves in the 19
forties, but it's not even used for wolves anymore
because it only works for wolves in captivity by
the hierarchies of alpha males. Uh BUT it's used
for other primates, for example. So in primate societies
where there's a dominance hierarchy, you will hear of
the alpha male, but there's also always an alpha
female. That's something that you never see in the
manos spe you know, that's a classic. Uh THEY
kind of honed in on the alpha male trope
because it fits, you know, former images of masculinity.
Uh BUT there's nothing about the alpha female trope
in 1819 eighties, Franz de Valls, the famous primatologist
wrote his book Chimpanzee Politics and it was a
hit in Wall Street in Washington DC. The right
wing Republican Representative Newt Gingrich told all his other,
you know, Senate uh House of the Representative Mates.
You should read that book. So alpha male kind
of became its own concept in the corporate world
in kind of right wing self help spheres. And
interestingly, it's percolated also in the manos sphere seduction
techniques. And I think what's really flawed in their
understanding they have of it is that it's this
independent aloof type of thing, you know, we're a
social species. So of course, we have hierarchies in
humans and we can look at other primates with
dominance hierarchies to kind of understand what's going on
in our species, even though it's more complicated here.
But we are a social species. So an alpha
male doesn't have to be uh necessarily aggressive. It
doesn't have to be necessarily, and it can't be
solitary and independent. That's the thing, you know, in
a social species, all leaders tend to be connected,
they tend to know how to use humor, flattery
coalitions, alliances, they solve issues for others that might
be generous. So the idea is not so much
with, I mean, there are two issues. They use
this concept of alpha male which has no real
scientific relevance and validity in humans. And it's not
really used by psychologists, anthropologists, uh sociologists to talk
about human society in the first place. So we
don't really know what it is, what it predicts.
It's not a good scientific theory. But also even
if you look at other animals where we use
it, we just use it as a label for
up in the hierarchy. But the features that make
another primate top of the hierarchy are clearly not
necessarily the ones that the manos fear. You know,
dating coaches tell you to mimic or imitate in
humans. You know, they tell you to be some
sort of as asshole frankly. And uh if you're
an asshole, you're not gonna remain in power for
a very long time. So in private and societies,
you know, you see alpha males that are much
more politically savvy and actually more benevolent than anything
you can find in the manoe and my own
personal analysis and issue with that. What I found
is that this is such a broad concept and
I've seen it with my eyes, you know, in
analyzing hundreds and thousands of pages of manager content,
everything can be construed as alpha. So they use
it as an adjective they'll say, oh, this is
so alpha, bro, you know anything, if you put
the right twist on it, you know. Oh I
lied to her. Oh, that's alpha. You know, you
didn't let her penetrate your thoughts or I told
her the truth. Oh, that's alpha. You know, you
don't, you're not afraid of opening up the truth.
It's just a concept that's kind of devoid of
any meaning and that's really blurry and then it
can hence be used to. Yeah, to mean anything.
So I think it's kind of pointless.
Yeah. And I guess that when it comes to
alpha males and also gender roles more broadly, uh
uh we also hear it's, it's very common for,
for us to hear in the Manoe people saying
particularly the ones of course, who get some money
out of these, uh they make them making limbs
about how uh exaggerated claims about how I if,
if you want a girl, if you want a
wife or something like that you have to go
to the gym, you have to have a six
figure salary. You have to have fancy cars, fancy
clothes, fancy watches and, and stuff like that. So,
I, I mean, they are exactly exaggerating what women
like and even some of those things perhaps not
even apply to a vast majority of them. But
also, I guess that by exaggerating they're also putting
even more pressure on the sorts of vulnerable men
that tend to follow them.
Yeah. So there's a hard balance to find the
red pillars. They are against what they call the
Blue Pill in the Blue Pill they think is
the kind of romantic vision of love and relationships
that you are fed when you're a kid, eventually
someone will love you, you will find someone who
likes you for who you are. Just be yourself.
And your mom tells you that you're the most
beautiful, wonderful son in the world. And they, they
say that's how most uh men, young kids, boys
are brought up in Western society. But this is
all lies because when you look at studies, you
do see that. Of course, there are thousands of
factors that do have predictive power that do have
an influence on my choice. So we know about
height, we know about confidence, humor, prowess, you know,
being socially connected, all the things that is also
part of our folk wisdom that we don't all
have equal chances in the game. Of, you know,
relationships and sex. And so the red pillars, what
they kind of say is that they use that
caricature version of the blue pill that they think
everyone is being fed. And they say we are
the realists, we offer the hard truth. You know,
we are going to tell you the science of
how, you know, you need to do to succeed
when it's a tough world and you're gonna lose
all your illusions and you can shed those blue
blue pill beliefs. You know, you can't be just
yourself. It's not gonna work. You have to go
to the gym, blah, blah, blah. And the thing
is those are two extreme caricatures and as often
the truth, just somewhere on a huge spectrum in
the middle, you know, obviously, uh if you never
shower and you never go to talk to anyone
and you're rude as hell, you're never gonna find
a girlfriend. So the Blue Bill myth, you know,
just be yourself. Uh AND it will eventually work
out is plain wrong, you know, and a lot
of incels have found it for themselves. So they
cater to these other narratives which are extremely extreme,
which are equally extreme. And that's uh yeah, they
overemphasize the importance of a few selected traits and
factors in explaining extremely complex phenomena. And um they
are really, really bent on generalizations. So they have
this um acronym in the red pill, which is
called a walt. It means all women are like
that, you know, so we were talking about variability
and we know, I mean, we've all seen, you
know, women who go out with all different types
of men and we've seen huge age gaps in
either directions. I mean, if there is one area
where you find all potential arrangements and things that
sex and relationships, so we know that all women
are not like anything but still there's this, you
know, gross generalizations um which I think can be
useful to some young men. I mean, I think
pick up artists uh in the two thousands. If
they tell someone, you need to build confidence, you
need to kind of go out there and meet
people, get a social circle and you'll eventually meet
girls. Obviously, that's a better discourse to be hearing
and even then just lay down and rot, which
is what the incels tell these young men now,
you know, it's over, it's doomed. So what do
they have left, you know, video games, porn, uh
suicides, mass shootings. It's just very bleak as well.
So I'm saying, you know, some of the self
help motivational narratives can have a positive effect on
some young men's trajectories. And for sure someone telling
you, you know, here are basic things that women
like, you know, confidence, blah, blah, blah, probably com
compared the thing is. How much do you exaggerate
this and what's the vision of female nature that
you have behind that, you know, is it just
neutral, is passionate scientific here are the preferences of
men and women here they come from or is
it driven by, you know, this, this misogynistic biases
and tropes like they are all like this, she
will never like you for who you are. She's
always looking for another, we don't know, you know,
there's much more variability and the very interesting thing
that I noticed on Intel forums is that back
when they were on Reddit, now they've all been
banned. You had a lot of normies coming. So
people from outside communities and the women would say,
actually, I'm not like this, you describe someone, but
that's not how I feel my boyfriend is autistic
or I don't discriminate men based on their height
or something. And they would never believe they would
never accept these testimonies by women who are kind
of trying to help them. Like you do have
a chance. You know, my boyfriend is not a
chad and I love him dearly and they kept
on saying that's wrong. That's just what you say.
But what your what are your revealed preferences, you
know, stated preferences are easy. So they have kind
of this double standard for skepticism. You know, if
there's something that feeds your world view, they can
accept the most ridiculous piece of evidence to show
that it proves validates their vision of female nature,
which is very dark. Uh But then if you
have examples in the other direction. They are gonna
be the most. Yeah, hardened skeptics and they won't
believe it, unfortunately. So that's kind of the opposite
of the, the open mind you need for scientific
inquiry where you're ready to accept evidence for all
positions, basically.
Yeah. And so just as a last topic here,
um what would you say, perhaps since you've been
studying and looking into these manos ferre communities and
so on, what would you say, perhaps would be
some of the best ways to try to fight
back against the misappropriation of evolutionary science and even
other kinds of science that they do there.
So that's obviously the question that I'm being asked
a lot because I study this and people come
and they say, uh so what's the solution? What
should we do? It's hard, it's hard because that's
a great science. You know, I don't want to
censor evolutionary psychology. Uh Most people do genuinely good
work and they are motivated by looking for the
truth and I don't want to come up as
some sort of, you know, censor for the entire
field. I love it. I want to contribute to
the field. On the other hand, we can't accept
the idea that we have no responsibility. You know,
most people do things with our research. I can
never prevent it. So why should I do everything,
anything about it? And it's true that it's very
hard to prevent my friend Macken uh who's the
science podcaster? He's gone and he's debated pits from
the Manos sphere alive. And he said, at the
end, you know, I don't feel like I accomplished
anything. I feel like I've, they've kind of became
more radical, more entrenched in their position. It's just
not working. So it's really tough work. Um I
think at least if the field makes sure that
it communicates clearly that the results are solid, that
you mentioned the variability, the uncertainties that you're cautious
about generalization. But you also mentioned, you know, the
effect sizes and things like that. There's a lot
you can do to kind of try to shield
yourself from appropriation by politicized factions. And at least
if it doesn't work, maybe it can sh shield
the field from criticisms from other branches of academia
because that's apr disaster, you know, ep is already
controversial and you do have communities that some of
them do mass shootings. For example, sometimes, you know,
periodically you have one insect that uh amidst acts
of massive violence. You don't want those people quoting
your science, you don't want those people, you know,
you don't want to be associated with them even
in terms of the politics of academia. So first,
I think there are incentives and justifications for evolutionary
scientists to take this seriously. Then there's the question
of what they can do and then it becomes
really hard because as I said, the content is
open, it's on the internet, it's accessible and we
like that. And I'm not even sure sometimes that
there's, there's a solution where you can really prevent
someone with different values from having a different conclusion.
So look, for example, scientific studies, they look at
links between variables, right? They tell you, I looked
at this little bit of nature or society and
here is, I think if you pull this lever,
this happens, this is what happens and that's it.
They are descriptive. Now, they might end their paper
by saying, well, maybe we can use this lever
to, you know, accomplish that goal. But nothing prevents
someone with completely different values to say, oh, I'm
gonna use this lever to accomplish this goal. And
even if a scientist were, was telling people, hey,
look, I've studied women's mate preferences. Here is what
would make them tick. Please don't use this to
seduce women or please don't use this for that.
I mean, no one believes people would actually believe
that. So what, what do we do as social
scientists? If we find things where you know, this
link between variables can be used for all kinds
of ends. It's a really difficult question. So I've
seen in cells, for example, being fascinated with research
on endocrine disrupting chemicals. Uh They do think that
there's some sort of global homosexual Jewish conspiracy that's
poisoning the water as we speak and trying to
make men into more feminized versions of men. And
it's true that if you look at the research,
they are not Jewish conspiracies, but endocrine disrupting chemicals
in our drinking water. We do find that the
water is polluted and the values of most scientists
who study this is to say we find this
link and in terms of prescript. So this is
descriptive and in terms of prescription, we think this
means we can filter the water, we could use
this technology, we can heal people in cells. Let's
say, let's ban the contraceptives, let's ban the contraceptive
pill because that's where a lot of the chemicals
the estrogens come from and from their own point
of view, if you don't have sex and if
you hate women, why should you care that people
pollute your drinking water with your contraceptive pills? So
once again, they have very different values. So they
have their different interpretation of the research. But what
can the researchers do about it? I don't think
they can do much. So when I'm being asked
for easy fixes, I think it's really hard because
these are politics and I mean, if I could
use my magic wand and kind of fix, you
know, hatred and division between communities and nations in
politics, I would do it. But the thing is
the Manoe is also anchored to the broader political
climate of, you know, culture wars, online, polarized politics
in the US. So it's been drifting more and
more to the right in Europe here as well.
Uh YOU find in the European memos here, so
Spanish Italian French, you find much more of the
anti imig uh far, right, uh positions that are
spreading politically across Europe from eastern northern, southern Europe.
And the Manoe is just part of that. I
mean, it's, it's somewhere in that cultural landscape. So
I would be very presumptuous if, if I thought
that I myself could find solutions. Um, YOU know,
to kind of hundreds of thousands or millions of
people holding beliefs that I don't agree with or
that I find distasteful. So I think it's really
hard, that's political struggle, that's ideological battle, which is
not really my industry as a researcher. And my,
maybe my final take on that would be, it's
really hard to correct people's opinions and beliefs. And
if we are to be a liberal, tolerant society,
our goal is also to be, that's one of
the classics of liberalism. You know, people do their
thing, people think what they want, they have their
own religion, they have their own beliefs. I don't
mind. So, at the end of the day, if
you have red tailed men and red tailed women
who want to be in traditional marriages and they
consent to the thing and the woman likes, you
know, making sandwiches for her husband. Hey, I think
that's a pity. That's not how I want to
run my life, but that's also not the worst
in the tolerant open society. So maybe what we
should focus on is the overtly antisocial, um, dangerous
violent consequences, manifestations of mane ideology. I'm not sure
I can always, I can ever be able to
get out, you know, traditional views about traditional gender
roles and masculinity. Those go back for Millenia. However,
you know, if we make sure that we prevent
the more radicalized members from committing terror attacks, we
protect, you know, people from cyber harassment because if
you're a feminist and you speak out on some
of these issues, uh you're gonna receive reams of
cyber harassment myself. As a manager, researcher, I've had
to make sure to take precautions along the way
and things like that. So if we actually can
make sure that, you know, these things are mitigated
and then hopefully some content producers, some politicians can
inspire young men and just bring forward new models
of masculinity and answer men about their anxieties about
current society because uh there are anxieties that are
completely legitimate that drive people to the manos spe
young men seem to be more likely to fall
prey to, you know, video game addictions, pornography addictions.
They are doing less well than girls at school.
And the gap is widening, they are enrolling less
in college. So there's definitely a lot of space
to occupy for politics in those male issues. Uh
TRYING to tell male men, you know, about what
their role and their identity should be as men,
as even biological males. You know, I, I love
biology but, uh, I wish it was done by
other people than those in the mane. And, uh,
unfortunately there's, yeah, there's lots of work to do
on these issues. And at the moment, lots of
young men are catering towards tiktok or youtube content
that just tells them how to be those, uh,
assholes basically. But, uh, I, I wouldn't know of
a, of a solution to that. I think it
would come from politics, from deep changes. And I
think this disgruntlement of segments of the male population
also has deep economic roots. You know, the the
Western countries have been kind of plateauing or declining,
not declining, but their economies, you know, are not
booming like they used to be in the post
World War Two era. So for a lot of
men today, you know, you're not necessarily necessarily gonna
do as well as your parents. You're not gonna
be able to buy a house in a big
city because the real estate prices, blah, blah, blah,
those are all super deep political economic issues. And
I think they are driving forces in the manos
sphere as well. So my question, my answer would
be, it's complicated and I don't have any, you
know, magic solution.
Yeah, but great. Uh I think that's a very
good final message for us to win the interview
one. And Louie uh if people are interested in
learning more about you and your work, where can
they find you on the internet,
you can find my publications on Google's color. And
then I am almost, I don't know when the
podcast will be out, but I am writing up
the final stages of my phd dissertation. So if
you're more interested about this, I wrote 400 pages
of Mano Sphere, History, Manoe Sociology. And you will
have a complete breakdown of my analysis where I
compare the scientific state of the art, the scientific
literature. And I try to be really fair and
even handed to what people actually say in the
manos. And so if yourself, some of your listeners
are, you know, adjacent or interested involved in the
atmosphere. Um I'm trying to examine your beliefs and
tropes and compare them with what actual evolutionary science
says. And uh I hope it can, you know,
lead you to reconsider some positions or to nuance
some of them that would be uh also uh
I would be very proud if my research can
accomplish that.
Great. So perhaps we have to schedule a second
interview when your dissertation is finished. So to talk
about all of the other information you will probably
have there. So thank you so much for doing
this. It's been a very fun and uh very
fun and informative conversation too. Thanks for having me,
Ricardo. Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it. Leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall,
her ma J and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi na Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari
and YPJ Barboza Julian. Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Lati Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary
ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki,
Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old
Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B brand Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman Perros,
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert. Liam Dan Biar. Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers, these
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller, Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.